
Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 62208-h.htm or 62208-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/62208/62208-h/62208-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/62208/62208-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/howtofoldnapkins00whit


Transcriber’s note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

      Text enclosed by equal signs is in bold face (=bold=).

      Small capitals have been converted to SOLID capitals.





APPENDIX TO THE STEWARD’S HANDBOOK.

HOW TO FOLD NAPKINS.

Abundantly Illustrated

With Many Handsome Styles and Diagrams
Which Show How it is Done.


[Illustration]






Chicago, Ill.
Jessup Whitehead,
Publisher Hotel Cook Books,
183 North Peoria Street.

1888.

John Anderson & Co.
Printers,
183-187 N. Peoria St., Chicago, Ill.




                   CONTENTS.

                                      PAGE.
    Introduction                         5
    The Escutcheon                       7
    The Chestnut Pocket                  8
    The Shield                           8
    The Mitre                            8
    The Cornucopia                       9
    The Crown                            9
    The Scroll                          10
    The Slippers                        11
    The Cocked Hat, or Boat             11
    Another Boat                        12
    The Hamburg Drum                    13
    The Heraldic Rose and Star          14
    The Minarettes                      14
    The Shell                           15
    The Fan                             15
    The Rosette Fan                     16
    The Victoria Regia                  16
    The Swan                            16
    Lorgnettes                          17
    The Pyramid                         17
    The Fleur-de-Lys                    18
    The Archbishop’s, or Double Mitre   18
    The Bread Basket                    19
    The Flower Basket                   20
    The Imperial Crown                  20
    The Double Horn of Plenty           21
    The Colonne de Triomphe             21
    The Tulip                           22
    The Bridal Serviette                23
    The Prince of Wales’s Feather       24




INTRODUCTION.


The folding of the serviette may often be made complimentary to the
guest. Not only does “the Bridal” point out its special application;
but “the Crown,” “the Prince of Wales’s Feather,” and “the Mitre.” “The
Boat” is appropriate when a naval chief is the honored guest; “the
Colonne de Triomphe,” for the entertainment of a hero fresh from a new
victory; “the Victoria Regia” for a distinguished botanist, and “the
Fan” for a reigning belle, so may “the Cocked Hat” be made available
when a military hero is entertained, and “the Heraldic Rose” for a
guest whose hobby is with things that appertain to the board.

In the days of our forefathers the quantity and quality of the viands
were thought of more consideration than the appointments of the table.
Provided the hospitable board groaned beneath the combined weight of
substantial food and a silver service, the banquet was pronounced
magnificent. Now we have changed all that. The contents of the dishes
have become secondary in importance to the decorations. The eye must
be feasted as well as the palate. Heavy silver ornaments have given
place, or at least are associated with, vases of crystal and abundance
of flowers, with scent fountains and the choice fruit selected for
dessert. The folding of the serviette, or table napkin, was always
a matter of attention; at the present moment it is doubly so, when
the luxury of table decorations are carried to such an extent that
ingenuity is constantly on the strain, not only to produce every
possible variety of _cartes de menu_, but even fanciful stands to hold
them or the guests’ name-cards in a prominent position. The parlor maid
or the waiter, or the dainty mistress of the house herself, must look
to their laurels in the matter of folding serviettes, or the other
showy trifles placed on the board will cast the attractions of the
table napkin completely into the shade. To fold them well in the more
elaborate styles, it is necessary that they should be made of very
fine, but rather stout damask, starched more or less, quite fresh and
nearly new. Old damask, that is soft, will not take the more elaborate
forms. Each serviette, previous to folding it, should be laid on the
ironing-board damped with (raw) starch, smoothed with a hot iron,
and immediately folded whilst crisp and steaming. It not only folds
better, but preserves the form longer by such means; and unless this
is attended to designs like “the Fan,” “the Victoria Regia,” “the
Bridal,” and “the Colonne de Triomphe,” could not effectually be made.
“The Boat” and “the Basket” also require very stiff serviettes. The
serviettes must be exactly square, and pains taken to make the sides
perfectly even and true.




FOLDING SERVIETTES.


THE ESCUTCHEON.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

This is one of the easiest methods possible of ornamentally folding a
serviette, and we recommend a novice to commence with it. Indeed, we
have arranged the folding as progressively as possible. Although it
will sit more crisp and fresh in appearance if made with a fine new
well starched material, the Escutcheon can be made very well with old
or even crumpled damask, though, of course, serviettes should always
be scrupulously clean and smooth. First, fold the serviette in half
lengthwise; and then fold it in half again lengthwise, keeping the
edges to the lower end, which comes where in the diagram A A and B B
are marked (see fig. 1). It is necessary to be always very precise in
making the folds, bringing the edges and corners exactly to meet, a
rule which applies to all the designs; but without strict attention to
which, the more elaborate patterns cannot be represented.

Now turn over each end of the serviette (which you have already folded
in four), in the manner shown in fig. 1, creasing it quite flat. Then
take one of the ends and roll it up in the manner shown in fig. 2, from
C to D. Take the other end, E, and roll it in the same way. It is to be
observed that these rolls are brought exactly to meet (not to overlap)
the triangle formed at the top. It is, however, necessary to remark
that the napkin is to be rolled in the reverse way from that apparent
in the illustration; that is, to be rolled _under_ and not _over_, a
difference which must not be neglected. Keep the rolls one in each
hand, and with a twist of the wrist bring over the roll C, to the point
F (causing the fold marked by the dotted line), and with a twist of the
other wrist bring the roll up to the same point to match it. Then lay
it flat on the table, the rolls underneath (see fig. 3), and keeping
them down with the hand, raise the other part and shape it as shown in
fig. 4, and slip the dinner roll in the hollow at the back.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]


THE CHESTNUT POCKET.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

Fold the serviette in half both ways, and open it again. Bring all the
corners to the centre. Turn it over and again bring all the corners
to the centre. Turn it back again and slip the chestnuts in the four
pockets to be observed in fig. 1.

Fig. 2, the Pocket Serviette, is made in the same way; but the corners
are brought three times, instead of twice, to the centre, turning it
each time (see fig. 2).


THE SHIELD.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

The Shield is almost identical with the Escutcheon; there is, however,
a slight difference, which forms a little variety and practice in the
art of napkin-folding.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

First form fig. 1, as for the Escutcheon. Next roll up the two ends
in the manner shown in fig. 2; that is, make the rolls outwardly, not
under as in the previous direction. The serviette will now resemble
fig. 3. Then set it into form, and place the bread inside. The face of
it will stand perfectly upright and resemble figure 4.


THE MITRE.

The Mitre is a well-known device, and one which always looks effective.
It is not unlike the Crown. Fold the damask in half, and turn down the
two corners to meet at both ends, in the manner shown in fig. 1, taking
care to let them meet very exactly and not overlap. Fold it in half at
the line A to B, fig. 1, to ascertain the centre. Open this last fold
again and bring the two points to the centre like fig. 2. Fold these
together at the dotted line with the points _outside_, let down one of
these corners again, and turn in the two points A and B also, to make a
triangle uniform with the others: it will now resemble fig. 3. Turn the
serviette over; let down the point on that side: it will then resemble
fig. 4. Turn in the corners A and B, by the line marked. Turn up the
point D to its former position: it will now resemble fig. 5. Slip the
hand inside the hollow to be found at the broad end, and shape it like
a cap, and the Mitre is complete.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]


THE CORNUCOPIA.

Cornucopias are easily folded, and very effective down a long dinner
table, with a single scarlet geranium flower at the apex of each. Halve
the serviette lengthways; turn down the corners at the two ends to meet
in the centre and form a triangle, like fig. 4, in the Crown. Take
the corners at the base and bring them to the apex, like fig. 1. Then
double it together with folds inside: it will now appear like fig. 2.
At the side marked A, there are three folds. Set it upright over the
dinner roll, with two of these folds one side and one on the other.
Shape it nicely, keeping the space from B to C close.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]


THE CROWN.

This is a handsome design, and is one which requires very well starched
damask. The bread is placed inside, underneath the crown. Now that
flowers are so much used, nothing could have a more charming effect
than a slight wreath of flowers round the base of it, at the part
marked A to B, in fig. 1. Fig. 2 represents the serviette laid on
the table. Fold it exactly in half from A to B, open and fold the
reverse way, from C to D. Open it again. These creases are merely made
to ascertain the true centre. At it lies, turn all the points to the
centre, and crease down in the manner observed in fig. 3, which forms
a diamond. Take the four corners of the diamond and fold them to the
centre again. The serviette will still preserve the shape shown in
diagram fig. 3, but be smaller in size. Bring the top, A, to the right
hand, B, and the left hand, B, to the other, A; it will now resemble
Fig. 4. Fold down the corners, E F and G H, parallel to the line I
J; it will now resemble fig. 5. Put the hand inside it at the broad
end, and shape it like a cap, over the hand, folding one end into the
other as shown at C, in fig. 5, The stiffness of the damask should be
sufficient to keep these last folds in place; the corner fold should
just be turned one corner within the other as an envelope, and pinched,
to secure its remaining firm.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]


THE SCROLL.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

The Scroll is simple to fold. It is represented complete (fig. 3).
The bread is under the centre, on which the name card may be laid.
It does not require to be stiff. First fold the serviette four times
lengthways. Fold down one end in the manner shown at A, in fig. 2. Then
fold the end A completely across, forming the line, B B. Roll up the
end A, and produce the fig. 3. Treat the other side in the same way.
Fig. 3 illustrates the process. The space in the middle, A, fig. 1, is
closed over the bread.


THE SLIPPERS.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

The Slippers are very easy to make. Double the serviette four times
lengthways. Then fold like fig. 1. The ends are simply rolled, taking
the corners in the method shown in fig. 2; bringing them over as shown
in fig. 3, and with another turn forming the Slippers (fig. 4). Secure
the point at A, with the left hand, whilst rolling up the other side;
and then hold both points together with the left hand and place the
right in the top of the Slippers, setting them over the dinner roll,
which should be placed underneath at B, fig. 4; and the Slippers
pinched close together at the top over it. A few flowers in the hollows
of the folds is a pretty addition.


THE COCKED HAT, OR BOAT.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

Fold a serviette in half lengthways (see fig. 1), then in half again
(fig. 2). Fold it lengthways again, with the edges-inside, in the way
shown in fig. 3. Fold it in half lengthways at the dotted line with the
edges outside. Turn down the corners in the manner explained by fig.
4, both sides alike; it now resembles fig. 5. Turn in the superfluous
end C, shown in fig. 4, inside the hat: this makes it resemble fig.
6. Shape it with the hand and slip it over the dinner bread. If the
edges are left outside in folding (fig. 3), when finished, a space will
be offered at the top wherein a few flowers may be placed. A Boat
may also be folded by this diagram by reversing its position on the
plate. A still better way to make the Boat is to double a serviette in
half lengthways, and again the reverse way. Fold the two edges to the
centre: this makes an oblong. Turn it over on the other side. Turn two
of the corners to meet in the centre; must not be opposite corners,
but both at the right end. Turn the two left end corners half to the
middle. Iron down. Then fold the whole in half lengthways, having the
corners inside. This completes the Boat. Put the bread underneath.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]


ANOTHER BOAT.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

The Boat is exceedingly pretty, especially if freighted with a few
flowers. The serviette should be well starched to sit firm and sharp,
and must be an exact square. First fold it in half like a shawl. Next
take the corner A (fig. 1), and bring it to C. Turn over the serviette
on the other side. Take the corner B, and bring it to C in the same
way, but on the other side: this forms fig. 2. Fold fig. 2 in half by
the line in the centre, bringing D to E, and forming fig. 3. Fold the
point F to H. Turn over the serviette and fold G to H, on the other
side; this produces fig. 4. Fold the half of the end J to K, producing
fig. 5. Fold L to K, on the other side. These folds must be so made as
to leave the upper part of the serviette, which will now again open and
look like fig. 3, from F to G. Slip the hand inside here, round it open
a little, and so bring F to meet G, making it flat the reverse way:
this is represented by fig. 6. Turn down the whole point M to N, on
the thinnest side, like fig. 7. Slip in the thumbs at the opening at O
in fig. 7, and holding the last fold firmly down; dexterously turning
the Boat inside out: the inside fold resembles a capital A. Pinch the
sides of the A the other way, making it an A again; and drawing out
the Boat lengthways. Shape it a little with the hand. The bread may be
slipped under the centre, A, or cabin of the Boat, provided it is not
too large. A pretty addition to this would be to attach the _carte de
menu_, by the means of a Chinese ribbon, to a chip, spill, or blender
stick, and fix it in the Boat as a sail. The name card may also be
attached to resemble an additional sail.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]


THE HAMBURG DRUM.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

The first three folds are made like those of the Mitre; namely, fold
the serviette in half lengthways. Turn down the corners like fig. 1,
fold it in half across the centre, inwards, from A to B, keeping the
corners inside. It will now resemble fig. 2. Fold it again from C to D,
into the shape of fig. 3. Let down the point E; turn down the corners
F and G, to make a triangle uniform with the others: thus you have
fig. 4. Let down the corner H, as shown in fig. 5: this corner must be
the one that has the selvage on the lower corner. Make the fold by the
dotted line in fig. 5: this produces fig. 6. Take the upper fold at A
and B in the same diagram, open it back and crease it down to resemble
fig. 7; turn the napkin over. You now have fig. 8. Fold over the edges
C and D to E, to match the folds on the other side. Turn up the napkin
again; turn up the point C, and bring the corners, E and F, together
likewise. Slip the hand into the hollow at the base, as you did for the
Mitre; and place over the bread.

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

[Illustration: Fig. 8.]


THE HERALDIC ROSE AND STAR.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

Spread a serviette, full size, flat on the table. It must be a perfect
square, exact at the corners. Bring the four corners exactly to the
centre, in the way described in fig. 1. Take the corners A and B, and
without turning the serviette, again bring them to the centre, as shown
in fig. 2. Bring C and D likewise to the centre: this forms fig. 3.
Take one corner and turn it _under_ (not over as before) by the dotted
line _e_ to _f_; turn under the other three the same way. Then again
bring all the four corners to the centre, on the upper side, as in fig.
2.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

Afterwards repeat turning all the corners under, as in fig. 3. Then
once more repeat fig. 2, and bring the remaining corners to the centre,
uppermost. Press the folds firmly down. Then, one at a time, turn the
corners half back, shaping them like little pockets, by slipping the
fingers in at C (A to B, fig. 4), and forming the corners out square.
This makes the Rose. Or by turning it down in the same way, without
squaring out the corners, the Star, fig. 5, is made. Open up the eight
petals, to be found in the centre, and fit in the dinner roll.


THE MINARETTES.

The Minarettes is a design expressly originated for the present work.
It requires to be well stiffened. Fold the napkin in half. Turn down
the corners as in fig. 1 of the Mitre. Fold in half and turn in the
corners till you have an exact triangle as in the Mitre (see fig. 1).
Then let down the outer side of the triangle. Fold the corners at both
sides by the dotted lines, A and B (fig. 1). Take the outer pieces, C
and D, and fold back so as to have two points alike. Fold the lower end
to match; halve it, and you will now have fig. 2. Fold up at the dotted
line. Pass the fold inside like fig. 3. Bend over the corners like fig.
4, and place the Minarettes over the roll.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]


THE SHELL.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

The Shell requires a very stiff serviette. Fold the two edges together
in the centre, lengthways, as shown in fig. 1. Fold in half down the
centre, also lengthways, leaving the edges outside. Then crimp evenly
in the manner shown in fig. 2. Open up the top end, and turn down the
edges each way, as they appear in fig. 3. Keep the lower ends together
like a fan. If well done, it can be balanced on the plate by the ends,
in the manner illustrated by fig. 4.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]


THE FAN.

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

The fan is made precisely like the Shell, only the edges are not turned
down; but in folding, at first, are kept inside. The fan is placed in a
glass, in the way shown in fig. 5.

It is, also, sometimes folded again before crimping three parts up.
This forms a double Fan, and the lower one should be pulled out a
little by the fingers.


THE ROSETTE FAN.

The Rosette Fan is very handsome and uncommon, but difficult to make,
requiring very nice manipulation. First fold the serviette in half,
lengthways, the edges downward. As it lays on the table, make it into
three equal folds, lengthways. Then take the upper fold between the
finger and thumb, lengthways, and the lower fold between the second
and third fingers of each hand. Bring the lower fold up to within an
inch and a half of the fold left, and the one between the finger and
thumb to within an inch and a half of that. The hemmed edges ought to
be an inch and a half below the last of the three plaits you have now
formed. Press them well down. Crimp as for the Rosette. Hold what would
be the handle of the Fan well in the left hand, and keep it all close
together. Insert right through the upper fold or plait the handle of a
silver fork, the flat way, and when right through, turn it, rounding
out the plait like a bullionné on a lady’s dress. Treat the other two
plaits in the same way. Then put the handle end firmly in a glass and
let the top spread out. The effect is excellent.


THE VICTORIA REGIA.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

This spirited design is difficult to accomplish, and requires to be
very stiff indeed. Fold the serviette in half twice, lengthways,
keeping the hems to the edge. Then plait it as the Shell was plaited,
in the way shown in fig. 1. The number of petals will depend on the
number of folds, which should be twice as many as were made for the
Shell, the width being only half as much. Keep the folds as close
together as possible, and begin forming the petals by drawing back the
first hem, as the edge of the Shell was done. Proceed to turn down the
next fold and make another round of petals to meet the first ones, and
finish by making the last hem fold in the same way (fig. 2). Set it
round by bringing the two edges of the serviette together. It is not
at all easy to set the petals well. The bread is not to be placed in
or under it; but a single flower, such as a rose, may very properly be
slipped into the heart. Fig. 3 represents the Victoria Regia, which
should be placed in the centre of the plate.


THE SWAN.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

The Swan is a very simple fold, yet one requiring some knack to
produce. The serviette should be very stiff. Form a triangle by folding
it in half. Hold the point, A, between the teeth; take C and B in
each hand. Hold it tight across the chest, so that from A to D it is
strained tight against you. Roll up the ends B and C very tight, one in
each hand, in the manner shown in fig. 2. The reason it is held tight
across the chest is to keep it plain at E; otherwise it would curl up
to the top. Now bring the points B and C together (fig. 2). Bend over
the point A and shape the twisted pieces so as to give the appearance
of a Swan. Our illustration gives but a rough notion of it, as it is
not easy to delineate well on paper, and at the same time show the
way of bending it. With a little manipulation, a very good imitation
of a Swan may be produced. The centre piece is the head and neck; the
twisted portions represent the outline of the breast, body and the legs.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]


LORGNETTES.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

Lorgnettes are very easy indeed, and are a neat design. Fold the
serviette in half lengthways. Fold back an inch, or an inch and a
half, at the double end, and bring it to the centre, in the same way
observable in fig. 1. Turn it over on the other side and roll both
ends, one at a time, to the centre; taking care to press in with the
fingers, as it is rolled, the tendency is to bag up; so as to keep
it smooth outside, and the centre band tight. Stand it upright. The
Lorgnettes do not inclose the bread.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]


THE PYRAMID.

The Pyramid, provided the napkin is very stiff and fine, is easily
made. Double it in half one side within an inch of the other, so that
it may be more slender towards the point. Fold it in seven the narrow
way, like fig. 3, in the shell. Press these folds down with an iron;
then crimp them across with a paper knife, folding it in and out the
width of the knife. Lastly, join it round like a pyramid, and stand it
upright over the bread. For a bride, or a distinguished guest, slender
wreaths of flowers may be placed all round in every crimping.


THE FLEUR-DE-LYS.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

The Fleur-de-Lys should be folded with very stiff damask, a little
damp, and fresh ironed; but may be made with a small light damask,
without starch, by using a little pin at the back of the waist, marked
C to D in diagram (fig. 5). Rich heavy damask of a large size is always
tiresome to fold without starch, although looking whiter, brighter,
and handsomer on table. Lay the serviette flat on the table: fold it
in half; and in half again, lengthwise; keeping the selvages all to
the top. Halve it the narrow way, A to B (fig. 1). Merely make the
crease, and open this last fold again: thus you have the centre marked.
Take the ends E and D, and fold them to the centre: you thus have an
oblong, equal to two squares. Turn down the corner E, and you have a
resemblance to fig. 2. Take the point D in that diagram, and bring it
to C. Take the point E and turn it under to C, in the way shown in fig.
3. Treat the point F in the same manner. Thus fig. 4 is made. Double
fig. 4 in half, flat from A to B. Hold it tight between the thumb and
finger at C and D. Take hold of the points at A and pull them out
to resemble the petals of a Fleur-de-Lys, like fig. 5. Turn up the
corners, E and F, at right angles to stand it upon, pinching the waist
well in. If not quite stiff enough to stand alone, after being pinched
a moment, place a pin at the back of the waist; but pins are always
better avoided.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]


THE ARCHBISHOP’S, OR DOUBLE MITRE.

The Archbishop’s, or Double Mitre, is exceedingly pretty, and may be
folded from any serviette. First fold the linen in half, and lay it
flat on the table. Turn down six inches from the top. Fold down an inch
and a half of this at the edge, and fold that over again; the folds
forming an outside band like that shown in fig. 1, from A to B. Raise
the ends A and B in the hand, and form the point C, in fig. 2, allowing
the folds of the linen to overlap a little. Smooth it down flat,
without raising or moving it from the table; fold the lower end the
same, and bring it up to D E, in fig. 3. Turn the fold D E, down on the
right side, and make another point with it like that at C, in fig. 2,
but a little lower, so as to show the top point above it. Lastly, fold
up the lower edge F G, about an inch and a half, to form the band of
the Mitre. Bring the two ends F and G, round to the back, to make the
shape of a cap, and insert one in the other. If large enough, fit it
over the dinner roll. If not, set it on the table, and place the roll
upright in the hollow. The front should face the guest.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration]


THE BREAD BASKET.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

Fold the serviette four times lengthways. Turn down the corners in
the way observed in fig. 1. Make the three standing folds across the
centre, the middle one to project, C and D to bend inwards. This makes
a hill or ridge in the centre. Fold back each corner at the dotted
lines F and C. Now hold it erect like fig. 2. Pinch it up together in
a flat line. Make a circle of it by bringing the ends together and
inserting B in A. Place it round the bread.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]


THE FLOWER BASKET.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

Take a very stiff square of damask, and fold it exactly in half. Open
and fold in half the reverse way. The centre is now ascertained. Fold
all the corners very exactly to the centre. Iron them down; turn over,
and again turn the corners to the centre. Turn the serviette over again
and take each corner from the centre, and fold it back at the half.
Then crease it from A to B (fig. 1), open the crease, and fold it again
from C to D. Take it in the hand and bring the crease A to C, and C to
B, and so all round. This will enable you to make it stand. Hold the
apex between the fingers of one hand and square out the four sides.
This makes it resemble fig. 2, and completes it. A few flowers should
be arranged in the compartments. For variety the corners may be left
upright, like fig. 3. By reversing it, as shown in fig. 4, a different
design is obtained.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]


THE IMPERIAL CROWN.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

The Imperial Crown requires very stiff damask—an exact square is
best,—and either a very small serviette, or a very large one folded in
four, to reduce it to a quarter its size. Lay it flat on the table:
fold the end, A, B, over to the dotted line in the centre, C D. Do the
same the other side, bringing E F to C D. Then place the end, A B, in
three folds, as for a fan, the whole length of the damask, and crease
them down, making the folds exactly use the piece between A B, and the
fold at _g_, _h_. Then fold the end, E F, to match. Then bring the
folded ends, A B, to the centre, _j_, crossing the folded part of one
over the other where they meet. The serviette will now look like fig.
2. Turn the fold, E F, to the back and fold down. Next bring the corner
E, by the dotted line K J, completely across, like fig. 3; the end N
is to be level with the end E. The end N is then to be crossed over
to match, and the end of the band inserted in the folds of the other,
so as to hold firmly together. Put the hand inside and shape it. When
set over the dinner roll it will stand firm. It should be a full-sized
roll. The front of the hat should face the guest. If the _carte de
menu_ is not too large, it may be placed in the plaited fold at N,
before crossing the ends over.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]


THE DOUBLE HORN OF PLENTY.

This requires a stiff serviette, damp and fresh ironed. It may,
however, be made from a limp one, if a small pin is inserted at each
side, after the last fold. Lay the serviette flat on the table; fold in
four lengthwise, keeping all the selvages one way. Turn the two ends
to meet in the centre. Turn that over, and turn down two corners not
at the selvage edge, at the lines A to B, and C to D. Turn it over and
it will resemble fig. 1. Take the end C, and roll it over to D (see
fig. 2). Bring A to B in the same manner, and complete the design. It
is most suitable for a Christmas dinner party, when it may be filled
with holly or any bright flowers; or one space may be filled with holly
and the other with grapes, almonds, raisins, &c., to represent plenty
(see fig. 3). Pinch the horns down and hold them a minute, to make them
preserve their shape.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]


THE COLONNE DE TRIOMPHE.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

This is difficult to fold, although it may be done with a soft damask.
Starch is, however, an improvement. The secret of success depends
entirely on rolling it _very_ lightly. Lay the serviette flat on
the table. From A to B (fig. 1), fold down about six inches, if it
is a large serviette. After trying the fold once, by reference the
illustration, it will be seen if the proportion is properly kept. The
one which we have just folded ourselves, as a model, stands fifteen
inches high, eleven for the shaft of the column, and it is very erect
and firm, although made of limp damask. Fold the damask in half from
C to D (fig. 1), to ascertain the half. In the left hand nip up the
corner E, as shown in the illustration; the centre C and the corner G
in the same way, like fig. 2, shaping them into laurel leaves. Then
pleat down the serviette, holding the top still in the hand, in the
way described in fig. 3. Next take the end H (fig. 2), that is, the
left hand lower corner, and pass it completely round the serviette to
the right, bringing the selvage tight around A to B in fig. 3. Lay it
on the table, holding the neck at E grasped in the hand, at first; and
tucking down and keeping tight the folds from C to D (fig. 4), whilst
rolling over the end E to F, as tightly as possible, umbrella wise;
pressing it on the table as you roll it up, to keep it firm. Fasten the
end with a little pin. Then firmly tuck in the odd corners at the base,
in the way half a pound of sugar or an ounce of almonds are turned in.
Twine a wreath of flowers around it. The artificial wreaths of small
roses or holly, sold at the grocers’, are pretty for the purpose. Set
it upright, and with a little manipulation it will sit firm in the
plate.


THE TULIP.

The Tulip requires a very stiff material. The folds are very simple,
but requires nicety of fingering and pressure with a hot iron. Bring
all the corners to the centre, as for the Crown. Bring the corners down
to the centre again and again; in all five times. Press it well. Finish
all the serviettes to be folded so far, and then recommence with the
first by turning down all the corners one by one, to form the Tulip
petals, which should hang down in long points, like a dog’s ears. Place
the Tulip on a glass.

[Illustration]


THE BRIDAL SERVIETTE.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

The Bridal Serviette is almost identical with the Pyramid, and is so
called because it is a favorite for wedding breakfasts. At the top it
is to be decorated with a few flowers. For the bride, stephanotis,
white roses, or any white flowers available, mixed with a little orange
blossom. For the other guests a scarlet flower. The serviette must be
very stiff and damp from fresh ironing. Lay it on the table flat. Fold
it not in half, but within an inch and a half of the top (see fig.
1). Take the corners A and B, and fold them to C and D again, within
an inch and a half of the last fold, and like the last fold flat and
straight across. This produces fig. 2. Again take the ends E and F and
fold over to G and H, within an inch and a half of the last fold. This
will probably about halve the remaining piece; but that will depend on
the size of the serviette. Then fold it the narrow way, backwards and
forwards, as for a fan, nine times, creasing it firmly down. Opening it
as little as possible, turn down all the tops of the folds in the way
noticed in fig. 3, beginning at the top of the three tiers. Then join
it round, fixing the first fold over the last, and pinch it together at
the top.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]


THE PRINCE OF WALES’S FEATHER.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

The Prince of Wales’s Feather is a perfectly new design, invented
especially for the present work. It is simple in effect and very
handsome in appearance. It requires a very stiff crisp serviette. Lay
the damask on the table, ironing it damp. Fold it from fig. 2 in the
Crown, from A to B, using the hot iron to crease it. Without disturbing
this fold, crease in half again the reverse way, from C to D, thus
reducing the size to a quarter. Smooth it with the iron. Next fold
this in half diagonally, like fig. 4 in the Crown. Observe fig. 4, in
the illustrations on the present page, carefully. Fold it in half from
A to B, using the iron; this will produce fig. 2. Make the fold C to
B, on one side only, in the manner shown in fig. 3. Then fold it back
again at the dotted line D, and it will resemble fig. 4. Fold the other
side to match, always using the iron to press every fold. Open it and
it will resemble fig. 5, with the folds A, C, D. Make the folds, E, as
shown in fig. 5, taking care not to flatten the other folds, leaving
the serviette only just open enough to make the folds, E, each side. It
now resembles fig. 6. Bring the last two folds quite flat and inside
C and D, and it will resemble fig. 7. Treat the other side the same,
and then fold it in half in the middle, A, and it will resemble fig.
8. Now allow it to open a little and hold it by the apex, B, fig. 9.
Keep it very much indented in the centre (A to B); bring the wings or
side feathers forward, and curl over the three lips of the feather by
bending them with the fingers. Place it upright in a wine glass or a
slender single flower glass in the same manner as the Fan is placed.
Fig. 10 shows the Prince of Wales’s Feather complete.

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

[Illustration: Fig. 8.]

[Illustration: Fig. 9.]

[Illustration: Fig. 10.]




                              WHITEHEAD’S
                           HOTEL COOK BOOKS.

    =No. 1.—“THE AMERICAN PASTRY COOK”.=
                           (FOURTH EDITION.)
                        PRICE, POSTPAID, $2.00.
                        EMBRACES THE FOLLOWING:

    =PART FIRST=—The Hotel Book of Fine Pastries, Ices,
            Pies, Patties, Cakes, Creams, Custards, Charlottes,
            Jellies and Sweet Entrements in Variety.

    =PART SECOND=—The Hotel Book of Puddings, Souffles and
            Meringues. A handy Collection of Valuable Recipes,
            original, selected and perfected for use in Hotels
            and Eating Houses of every Grade.

    =PART THIRD=—The Hotel Book of Breads and Cakes;
            French, Vienna, Parker House, and other Rolls,
            Muffins, Waffles, Tea Cakes; Stock Yeast and
            Ferment; Yeast raised Cakes, etc., etc., as made in
            the best hotels.

    =PART FOURTH=—The Hotel Book of Salads and Cold
            Dishes, Salad Dressings, with and without oil;
            Salads of all kinds, how to make and how to serve
            them; Boned Fowls, Galantines, Aspics, etc., etc.

         ☞ The above parts of all comprised in the “AMERICAN
            PASTRY COOK,” together with a large amount of
            valuable miscellaneous culinary matter.


    =No. 2.—“HOTEL MEAT COOKING.”=
                           (FOURTH EDITION.)
                        PRICE, POSTPAID, $2.00.
                        EMBRACES THE FOLLOWING:

    =PART FIRST=—The Hotel, Fish and Oyster Book; Showing
            all the best methods of Cooking Oysters and Fish,
            for Restaurant and Hotel Service, together with the
            appropriate Sauces and Vegetables.

    =PART SECOND=—How to Cut Meats, and Roast, Boil and
            Broil. The entire trade of the Hotel Meat Cutter,
            Roaster and Broiler, including “Short Orders,”
            Omelets, etc.

    =PART THIRD=—The Hotel Books of Soups and Entrees,
            comprising specimens of French, English, and
            American _Menus_, with translations and comments.
            Showing how to make up Hotel Bills of Fare, with all
            the different varieties of Soups and Consommes in
            proper rotation, and a new set of entrees or “made
            dishes” for every day.

    =PART FOURTH=—Creole Cookery and Winter Resort
            Specialties.

    =PART FIFTH=—Cooks’ Scrap Book—A Collection of
            Culinary Stories, Poems, Stray Recipes, etc.,
            etc. Index of French Terms, an explanation and
            translation of all the French terms used in the
            Book, alphabetically arranged.

         ☞ The above parts are all comprised in “HOTEL MEAT
            COOKING,” together with a large and varied selection
            of matter pertaining to this part of the culinary art.


    =No. 3.—“WHITEHEAD’S FAMILY COOK BOOK.”=
                        PRICE, POSTPAID, $1.50.
             A PROFESSIONAL COOK’S BOOK FOR HOUSEHOLD USE.

         Consisting of a series of _Menus_ for every day
           meals and for private entertainments, with minute
             instructions for making every article named.

         The Recipes in all these books are properly headed, numbered
         and indexed, for handy reference.

         The author of this series of Hotel Cook Books is a professional
         Cook of Thirty Years’ experience, and every recipe has been
         tried and practically proved.

         The above books will be sent postpaid on receipt of price:
         “American Pastry Cook,” $2.00; “Hotel Meat Cooking,” $2.00;
         “Family Cook Book,” $1.50. All three will be sent to one
         address on receipt of $5.00. Address all orders to

                            _Jessup Whitehead_,
        OFFICE WITH             _Publisher of Hotel Cook Books_,
    _JOHN ANDERSON & CO._,          183 North Peoria Street,
    Booksellers and Publishers.               CHICAGO, ILL.




                                NO. 4.

          The Famous California Book of COOKING, STEWARDING,
                  CATERING, and HOTEL KEEPING, called

                          =Cooking for Profit=

                  AND EIGHT WEEKS AT A SUMMER RESORT.

                  Two Books in One. About 400 Pages.

         A Remarkable Volume which shows how Money is made by
            Boarding People and What it Costs to Live Well.

                            —PRICE, $3.00—

    For Sale at the Offices of all the Hotel Newspapers and Summer
     and Winter Resort Journals, and by the Author and Publisher,

                    =_Jessup Whitehead_,=
                              183-187 North Peoria St., CHICAGO, ILL.

                               CONTENTS.

    =PART FIRST=—Some Articles for the Show Case. The
        Lunch Counter. Restaurant Breakfasts, Lunches and
        Dinners. Hotel Breakfasts, Dinners and Suppers. Oyster
        and Fish House Dishes. The Ice Cream Saloon. Fine Bakery
        Lunch. Quaker Dairy Lunch. Confectionery Goods, Homemade
        Beers, etc.

    =PART SECOND=—Eight Weeks at a Summer Resort. _A
        Diary. Our daily Bill of Fare and what it costs._ A
        Party Supper of Forty Cents per Plate. The Art of
        Charging Enough. A School Commencement Supper. Question
        of How Many Fires. _Seven Fires for fifty persons vs.
        one Fire for fifty._ The Round of Beef for Steak. A
        Meat Block and Utensils. Bill of Groceries. _A Month’s
        Supply for a Summer Boarding House, with Prices._
        A Refrigerator Wanted. _About keeping Provisions;
        Restaurant Patterns._ A Good Hotel Refrigerator.
        _Cost of Ice to supply it._ Shall we have a Bill of
        Fare? _Reasons why: a Blank Form._ Is Fish Cheaper
        than Meat? Trouble with the Coffee. How to Scrub the
        Kitchen. Trouble with Steam Chest and Vegetables.
        Trouble with the Oatmeal. Building a House with Bread
        Crusts. Pudding without Eggs. A Pastry and Store Room
        Necessary. A Board on a Barrel. First Bill of Fare.
        Trouble with Sour Meats. Trouble with the Ice Cream.
        The Landlord’s Birthday Supper. _Showing how rich and
        fancy Cakes were made and iced and ornamented without
        using Eggs._ The Landlady’s Birthday Supper. Trouble in
        Planning Dinners. Trouble with Captain Johnson. Trouble
        in Serving Meals. Trouble with the Manager. Breakfasts
        and Suppers for Six Cents per Plate. Hotel Dinners
        for Ten Cents per Plate. Hotel Dinners for Seventeen
        Cents per Plate. Supper for Forty for Eight Cents per
        Plate. Breakfast for Forty for Nine Cents per Plate.
        An Expensive Wedding Breakfast, _for the Colonel and
        the Banker’s Daughter_. Four Thousand Meals. Review.
        Groceries for 4,000. Meat, Fish and Poultry for 4,000.
        Flour, Sugar and Coffee for 4,000. Butter and Eggs
        for 4,000. Potatoes, Fresh Vegetables and Fruits for
        4,000. Canned Fruits and Vegetables for 4,000. Milk and
        Cream for 4,000. Total Cost of Provisions for 4,000.
        How to Save Twenty Dollars per Week. How Much we Eat.
        How Much we Drink. How Much to Serve. Work and Wages.
        Laundry Work. Fuel, Light and Ice. Total Cost of Board.
        How Much Profit? How Many Cooks to How Many People?
        Boarding the Employees. Boarding Children. Meals for Ten
        or Fifteen Cents. Country Board at Five Dollars. If—a
        Bundle of Suppositions. Keeping Clean Side Towels. How
        Many Fires—Again. A Proposal to Rent for next Season.
        Conclusion.

                      =THE CONTENTS ALSO INCLUDE:=

        =One Hundred Different Bills of Fare=, of Actual
               Meals, all with New Dishes; the Amount and the
               Cost per Head.

        =Eleven Hundred Recipes.= All live matter that
               every Cook needs—both by Weight and by Cup and
               Spoon Measure.

        =A Dictionary of Cookery=, Comprised in the
               Explanations of Terms and General Information
               contained in the Directions.

        =Artistic Cookery.= Instructions in Ornamentation,
               with Illustrations, and Notes on the London Cookery
               Exhibition of 1885.

  It is thoroughly analytical, practical, readable, and the first
  book of the principles of the systematic hotel keeping. =PRICE $3.00.=
  Address the Publisher, or any Hotel Paper.




Preface to Whitehead’s No. 4 Cooking for Profit.


This book is in many respects a continuation of the preceding volumes
in the series, it fulfills the designs that were intended but not
finished before, more particularly in the second part which deals
with the cost of keeping up a table. It is not an argument either for
or against high prices, but it embodies in print for the first time
the methods of close-cutting management which a million of successful
boarding house and hotel-keepers are already practising, in order that
another million who are not successful may learn, if they will, wherein
their competitors have the advantage. At the time when the following
introduction was written, which was about four years before the finish,
I was just setting out, while indulging a rambling propensity, to
find out why it was that my hotel books which were proving admirably
adapted to the use of the ten hotels of a resort town were voted “too
rich for the blood” of the four hundred boarding-houses; also, it
was a question how so many of these houses running at low prices are
enabled to make money as easily as the hotels which have a much larger
income. At the same time some statistician published a statement that
attracted attention showing that the vast majority of the people of
this land have to live on an income of less than fifty cents a day. At
the same time also an English author published a little book, which,
however, I have not seen and did not need, with the title of “How to
live on sixpence a day,” (twelve cents) which was presumptive evidence
that it could be done. In quest of information on these points I went
around considerably and found a good many “Mrs. Tingees” who were not
keeping boarding-houses, and I honor them for the surpassing skill that
makes the fifty cents a day do such wonders; but the right vein was not
struck until the opportunity occurred to do both the buying and using
of provisions from the very first meal in a Summer Boarding House.

In reference to unfinished work I take the liberty here of saying that
the bills of fare in this book with the quantities and proportions and
relative cost from the continuation and complete illustration of an
article entitled “The Art of Catering” in _Hotel Meat Cooking_. Knowing
how much to cook, how much to charge, how to prevent waste and all such
questions raised there are carried out to an answer in these pages. In
regard to the use of French names for dishes it is necessary that a
statement should be made. A great reform has taken place in the last
ten years in the composition of hotel bills of fare, and the subject
matter of these books having been widely diffused by publication
in the hotel newspapers, has undoubtedly had much to do with the
improvement that is now observable. My own design was, however, to
explain French terms, give their origin and proper spelling, and to
that end I had a mass of anecdotes, historical mention and other
such material collected to make the explanations interesting. As a
preliminary, I began exposing the absurdities committed by ignorant
cooks and others trying to write French, and before this had proceeded
far the newspapers took up and advocated the idea that French terms
should be abolished altogether. If that was to be the way the knot of
misspelling and misnaming dishes was to be cut, there was no use for my
dictionary work and the material was thrown away; I followed the new
path and it proves a plain and sensible one. At the same time there is
an aspect of the subject which cooks seeking situations perceive and
editors of newspapers may never think of, and that is that there are
many employers whom the reform has not reached who will pay a hundred
dollars for a cook who can give his dishes imposing foreign names more
willingly than fifty dollars to a better cook who can only write United
States. First class hotels which have all the good things that come to
market avoid French terms. They that have turkey and lamb, chicken,
peas and asparagus, oysters and turtle and cream want them shown up
in the plainest reading; to cover them up with French names would be
injudicious; but if we have but the same beef and mutton every day, the
aid that a few ornamental terms can give is not to be despised. First
of all it is requisite that those who use such terms should know what
they are intended to indicate and how they should be spelled and then
they can be taken or left according to the intelligent judgment of
those concerned.

                                                       J. W.




                            WHITEHEAD’S

                    Professional Cookery Books.

    No. 1.—=THE AMERICAN PASTRY COOK.= A book
      of perfected Receipts, for making all sorts of
      articles required of the Hotel Pastry Cook, Baker
      and Confectioner. Seventh edition. Cloth, $2.00.

    No. 2.—=HOTEL MEAT COOKING.= Comprising Hotel
      and Restaurant Fish and Oyster Cooking. How to Cut
      Meats, and Soups, Entrees and Bills of fare. Sixth
      edition. Cloth, $2.00.

    No. 3.—=WHITEHEAD’S FAMILY COOK BOOK.=
      High-class cookery for families and party givers,
      including Book of Breads and Cakes. Fourth edition.
      Cloth, $1.50.

    No. 4.—=COOKING FOR PROFIT= and Eight Weeks at
      a Summer Resort. A new American Cook Book adapted
      for the use of all who serve meals for a price.
      Third edition. Cloth, $3.00.

    No. 5.—=THE STEWARD’S HANDBOOK= and Guide to
      Party Catering, Stewarding, Bills of Fare, and
      a _Dictionary of Dishes_ and Culinary Terms and
      Specialties. Cloth, $3.00.




                         WHITEHEAD’S NEW BOOK,
                              NUMBER 5,

                       =THE STEWARD’S HANDBOOK=
                     AND GUIDE TO PARTY CATERING.

                      =BY JESSUP WHITEHEAD.=
                    =PRICE, POSTPAID, $3.00.=

                        EMBRACES THE FOLLOWING:

    =PART FIRST—HOTEL STEWARDING.= Showing the Internal
            Workings of the American System of Hotel Keeping.
            The Steward’s Duties in Detail, and in Relation to
            Other Heads of Departments. Steward’s Storekeeping,
            Steward’s Bookkeeping, and Management of Help. Also,
            Composition of Bills of Fare, the Reasons Why, and
            Numerous Illustrative Menus of Meals on the American
            Plan.

    =PART SECOND—RESTAURANT STEWARDING.= Comprising a
            Survey of Various Styles of Restaurants and their
            Methods, Club Stewarding and Catering, Public Party
            Catering, Ball Suppers, Base Ball Lunches, Hotel
            Banquets, etc.; How to Prepare and How to Serve
            Them, with Numerous Pattern Bills of Fare Carried
            Out to Quantities, Cost and Price per Head.

    =PART THIRD—COMPRISING CATERING FOR PRIVATE PARTIES.=
            A Guide to Party Catering. Wedding Breakfasts,
            Fantasies of Party Givers, Model Small Menus, and
            Noteworthy Suppers, with Prices Charged. Also,
            Catering on a Grand Scale. Original and Selected
            Examples of Mammoth Catering Operations, Showing
            the Systems Followed by the Largest Catering
            Establishments in the World. Also, a Disquisition on
            Head Waiters and their Troops.

    =PART FOURTH—WHITEHEAD’S DICTIONARY OF DISHES=,
            Culinary Terms and Various Information Pertaining
            to the Steward’s Department, being the Essence of
            all Cook Books, Telling in Brief what all Dishes
            and Sauces are or what they should Look Like, What
            Materials are Needed for and what They are. How to
            Use to Advantage all Sorts of Abundant Provisions,
            or How to Keep Them. Comprising, also, a Valuable
            Collection of Restaurant Specialties, Distinctive
            National Cookery, Remarks on Adulterations, and How
            to Detect Them, Treatment and Service of Wine, and a
            Fund of Curious and Useful Information in Dictionary
            Form, for Stewards, Caterers, Chefs, Bakers, and all
            Hotel and Restaurant Keepers.

    =PART FIFTH—HOW TO FOLD NAPKINS.= Abundantly
            Illustrated with many Handsome Styles and Diagrams
            which Show how It is Done.

       ADDRESS ALL ORDERS TO
                        =_Jessup Whitehead & Co._,=
                                  PUBLISHERS OF HOTEL COOK BOOKS,
                                          CHICAGO, ILL.




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber’s note:

Illustrations have been moved so they do not break up paragraphs.

Typographical errors have been silently corrected.

